---

copyright:
  years: 2017, 2018
lastupdated: "2018-08-03"

---

{:new_window: target="_blank"}
{:shortdesc: .shortdesc}
{:screen: .screen}
{:codeblock: .codeblock}
{:pre: .pre}
{:tip: .tip}

<!-- Acrolinx: 2017-04-28 -->

# Security

## {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} DBaaS Data Protection and Security

Protecting application data for large-scale web and mobile apps can be complex,
especially with distributed and NoSQL databases.

Just as it reduces the effort of maintaining your databases
to keep them running and growing non-stop,
{{site.data.keyword.cloudantfull}} also ensures your data stays secure and protected.
{:shortdesc}

## Top-Tier Physical Platforms

The {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} DBaaS is
physically hosted on Tier-1 cloud infrastructure providers such as
{{site.data.keyword.cloud_notm}} and Amazon.
Therefore,
your data is protected by the network and physical security measures that are employed by those providers,
including (but not limited to):

- Certifications: Compliance with SSAE16, SOC2 Type 1, ISAE 3402, ISO 27001, CSA, and other standards.
- Access and identity management.
- General physical security of data centers and network operations center monitoring.
- Server hardening.
- {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} gives you the flexibility to
  choose or switch among the different providers
  as your SLA and cost requirements change.

More details about the certifications are available in the [Compliance information](compliance.html).
{:tip}

## Secure Access Control

{{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} has a multitude of built-in security features,
for you to control access to data:

Feature | Description
--------|------------
Authentication | {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} is accessed by using an HTTP API. Where the API endpoint requires it, the user is authenticated for every HTTPS or HTTP request {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} receives.
Authorization | Grant read, write, admin permissions to specific databases.
"In-flight" encryption | All access to {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} is encrypted by using HTTPS.
At-rest encryption | Data that is stored on disk in {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} can be encrypted. Note that data that is stored in an {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} instance is always encrypted.
API access | {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} is accessed programmatically by using an API over secure HTTP (HTTPS). API keys can be generated by using the {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} dashboard.
IP whitelisting | {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} customers who have a dedicated {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} environment can whitelist IP addresses to restrict access to only specified servers and users. A dedicated {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} environment can either be an {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} Enterprise in an {{site.data.keyword.cloud_notm}} Dedicated environment or an {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} Dedicated Hardware plan environment in {{site.data.keyword.cloud_notm}} Public. IP whitelisting is not available for any Shared or {{site.data.keyword.cloud_notm}} Public Lite/Standard plans that are deployed on multi-tenant environments.
CORS | Enable CORS support for specific domains by using the {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} dashboard.

<!--
> **Note**: Your data is visible to the {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} 
> worldwide team. If you don’t 
> want our team to see your data, encrypt it before sending it to 
> {{site.data.keyword.IBM_notm}}, and avoid leaking 
> data into your document `_id` and any attachment file names. In addition, 
> when you send personal data, you must use HTTPS to ensure that it is sent securely. 
> HTTP is no longer supported.  

> **Warning**: You are responsible for verifying that 
> {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} can be used to store 
> your data. You must also make sure that your data does not violate applicable 
> data protection laws or any regulations that require security measures 
> beyond those specified in the {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} 
> system requirements and {{site.data.keyword.cloud_notm}} Services terms. You must 
> verify that the security requirements are appropriate for any personal data 
> that is processed. If you are unsure, or intend to store data that is 
> beyond the scope of the {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} terms and conditions, 
> you must get approval from {{site.data.keyword.IBM_notm}} to ensure that it is 
> appropriate for {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} to store your data.
-->

## Protection Against Data Loss or Corruption

{{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} has a number of features
to help you maintain data quality and availability:

Feature | Description
--------|------------
Redundant and durable data storage | By default, {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} saves to disk three copies of every document to three different nodes in a cluster. Saving the copies ensures that a working failover copy of your data is always available, regardless of failures.
Data replication and export | You can replicate your databases continuously between clusters in different data centers, or to an on-premises {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} Local cluster, or Apache CouchDB. Another option is to export data from {{site.data.keyword.cloudant_short_notm}} (in JSON format) to other locations or sources (such as your own data center) for added data redundancy.
